README.md, before:

# scRNA-seq macrophages project with Kulkarni lab

This repository contains the code and analyses for the analysis of scRNA-seq macrophage data generated by the Kulkarni lab. 

## Authors

- Stephanie Hicks (shicks19@jhu.edu)
- Yongbao Zhuang (yzhuang8@jhmi.edu)

## Data 

### FASTQ files

The FASTQ files can only be accessed from the brahma server (after JHU VPN) and are available here: 

- `/mnt/morbo/Data/Sequencing/Raw_Backup/Kulkarni/Kulkarni_10X/fastqs/`

### `SingleCellExperiment` object

At the end of the Preprocessing section, a `SingleCellExperiment` object is created and available here: 

- TBA 

## Preprocessing 

This [website](https://combine-lab.github.io/alevin-tutorial/2018/setting-up-resources/) is helpful for setting up the resources needed to run `salmon alevin`. 

### Download GENCODE files

Run the shell script `01_quantification/download-gencode-files.R`. This downloads GENCODE files and creates the files necessary for alevin. Reference files were obtained for mouse release version M25. 

1. `GRCm38.primary_assembly.genome.fa.gz` - nucleotide (DNA) sequences of the **GRCm38 primary genome assembly**.
2. `gencode.vM25.transcripts.fa.gz` - nucleotide (DNA) sequences of **all transcripts** on reference chromosomes.
3. `gencode.vM25.annotation.gtf.gz` - gene annotation on the reference chromosomes (i.e. for humans, these are chromosomes 1 to 22, X, and Y), i.e. locations of genes and other information about the genes, gene structure

> Gene transfer format (GTF) is a file format used to hold information about gene structure. It is a tab-delimited text format based on the general feature format (GFF), but contains some additional conventions specific to gene information.

The specific locations of where the files were pulled from are from here:

- `ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/gencode/Gencode_mouse/release_M25/GRCm38.primary_assembly.genome.fa.gz`
- `ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/gencode/Gencode_mouse/release_M25/gencode.vM25.transcripts.fa.gz`
- `ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/gencode/Gencode_mouse/release_M25/gencode.vM25.annotation.gtf.gz`

The `01_quantification/download-gencode-files.R` script also creates a file `gencode.vM25.transcripts.tx2gene.mouse.tsv`. This file maps each transcript ID to a gene ID.

### Create decoys for `salmon alevin`

The decoy sequence is going to be the whole genome sequence (`GRCm38.primary_assembly.genome.fa.gz`). You can read more about decoy sequences in Salmon below:

* https://salmon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/salmon.html#preparing-transcriptome-indices-mapping-based-mode
* https://github.com/COMBINE-lab/SalmonTools/blob/master/README.md

Source for code: https://combine-lab.github.io/alevin-tutorial/2019/selective-alignment/

To use a decoy, we need to create two files:

1. `decoys.txt` is the names of the genome targets (decoys), will be used in the `-d` parameter in `build-index-salmon.sh`
2. `gentrome_transcripts_mouse.fa.gz` is a concatenated FASTA transcriptome, will be used in the `-t` parameter in `build-index-salmon.sh` (see below). Note that you need to recreate this in every pipeline.

These two files are created in the `01_quantification/create-decoys-salmon.sh` and will both be used `01_quantification/build-index-salmon.sh` file to build the salmon index (see next section).

### Using `salmon alevin` for quantification

The reads were quantified with `salmon alevin` to create a `SingleCellExperiment` object with the `tximeta` R/Bioconductor package. 

#### Install and build `salmon index` 

This part will have to be done for each user. 
I installed the salmon 1.3.0 binary in my home directory here `/users/shicks1/src/`. 

To install salmon v1.3.0: 
```{bash}
cd /users/shicks1/src/
wget https://github.com/COMBINE-lab/salmon/releases/download/v1.9.0/salmon-1.3.0_linux_x86_64.tar.gz
tar xzvf salmon-1.3.0_linux_x86_64.tar.gz
rm salmon-1.3.0_linux_x86_64.tar.gz
```

Also, make sure this is in your `.bash_profile` file
```{bash}
PATH=$PATH:/users/shicks1/src/salmon-latest_linux_x86_64/bin
```

You can check to make sure salmon has been upgraded correctly using `salmon -h` inside terminal (or help with specific parts of using salmon using e.g. `salmon index -h` for help with the index step). 

OK, we are ready to use `salmon`. 

- The `-t` argument is the input transcripts file. 
- The `-i` argument is the index file to create. 
- The `-d` argument is the decoy sequence. 
- The `--keepDuplicates` argument forces all duplicate transcripts (for example, multiple unspliced transcript of the same gene that are identical for example) that appear in the input will be retained and quantified separately. If you keep the duplicates they will be assigned identical expression levels since salmon can’t tell them apart. When you aggregate on the gene level, this will not make a difference any more. Therefore, I do not keep the duplicates as we are interested in gene level aggregation. 
- The `--gencode` flag will handle the composite fasta headers in GENCODE transcript fasta files and split the transcript name at the first '|' character. 
- The `--threads` argument says how many threads to use when building the index. 

The salmon index is built using the `01_quantification/build-index-salmon.sh` file (used 4 cores). The index uses the `decoys.txt` and is built from the combined FASTA file (`gentrome_transcripts_mouse.fa.gz`).

#### Running `salmon alevin`

We will now use the index created by `build-index-salmon.sh`.
See the `01_quantification/run-alevin.sh` file.

#### Create `SingleCellExperiment` object

Here we import the `quant` files into R/Bioconductor using `tximeta`.


## Data analysis

Commit message:

updating run-alevin code; adding run-tximeta code; starting analysis section

README.md, after:

# scRNA-seq macrophages project with Kulkarni lab

This repository contains the code and analyses for the analysis of scRNA-seq macrophage data generated by the Kulkarni lab. 

## Authors

- Stephanie Hicks (shicks19@jhu.edu)
- Yongbao Zhuang (yzhuang8@jhmi.edu)

## Data 

### FASTQ files

The FASTQ files can only be accessed from the brahma server (after JHU VPN) and are available here: 

- `/mnt/morbo/Data/Sequencing/Raw_Backup/Kulkarni/Kulkarni_10X/fastqs/`

### `SingleCellExperiment` object

At the end of the Preprocessing section, a `SingleCellExperiment` object is created and available here: 

- TBA 

## Preprocessing 

This [website](https://combine-lab.github.io/alevin-tutorial/2018/setting-up-resources/) is helpful for setting up the resources needed to run `salmon alevin`. 

### Download GENCODE files

Run the shell script `01_quantification/download-gencode-files.R`. This downloads GENCODE files and creates the files necessary for alevin. Reference files were obtained for mouse release version M25. 

1. `GRCm38.primary_assembly.genome.fa.gz` - nucleotide (DNA) sequences of the **GRCm38 primary genome assembly**.
2. `gencode.vM25.transcripts.fa.gz` - nucleotide (DNA) sequences of **all transcripts** on reference chromosomes.
3. `gencode.vM25.annotation.gtf.gz` - gene annotation on the reference chromosomes (i.e. for humans, these are chromosomes 1 to 22, X, and Y), i.e. locations of genes and other information about the genes, gene structure

> Gene transfer format (GTF) is a file format used to hold information about gene structure. It is a tab-delimited text format based on the general feature format (GFF), but contains some additional conventions specific to gene information.

The specific locations of where the files were pulled from are from here:

- `ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/gencode/Gencode_mouse/release_M25/GRCm38.primary_assembly.genome.fa.gz`
- `ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/gencode/Gencode_mouse/release_M25/gencode.vM25.transcripts.fa.gz`
- `ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/gencode/Gencode_mouse/release_M25/gencode.vM25.annotation.gtf.gz`

The `01_quantification/download-gencode-files.R` script also creates a file `gencode.vM25.transcripts.tx2gene.mouse.tsv`. This file maps each transcript ID to a gene ID.

### Create decoys for `salmon alevin`

The decoy sequence is going to be the whole genome sequence (`GRCm38.primary_assembly.genome.fa.gz`). You can read more about decoy sequences in Salmon below:

* https://salmon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/salmon.html#preparing-transcriptome-indices-mapping-based-mode
* https://github.com/COMBINE-lab/SalmonTools/blob/master/README.md

Source for code: https://combine-lab.github.io/alevin-tutorial/2019/selective-alignment/

To use a decoy, we need to create two files:

1. `decoys.txt` is the names of the genome targets (decoys), will be used in the `-d` parameter in `build-index-salmon.sh`
2. `gentrome_transcripts_mouse.fa.gz` is a concatenated FASTA transcriptome, will be used in the `-t` parameter in `build-index-salmon.sh` (see below). Note that you need to recreate this in every pipeline.

These two files are created in the `01_quantification/create-decoys-salmon.sh` and will both be used `01_quantification/build-index-salmon.sh` file to build the salmon index (see next section).

### Using `salmon alevin` for quantification

The reads were quantified with `salmon alevin` to create a `SingleCellExperiment` object with the `tximeta` R/Bioconductor package. 

#### Install and build `salmon index` 

This part will have to be done for each user. 
I installed the salmon 1.3.0 binary in my home directory here `/users/shicks1/src/`. 

To install salmon v1.3.0: 
```{bash}
cd /users/shicks1/src/
wget https://github.com/COMBINE-lab/salmon/releases/download/v1.9.0/salmon-1.3.0_linux_x86_64.tar.gz
tar xzvf salmon-1.3.0_linux_x86_64.tar.gz
rm salmon-1.3.0_linux_x86_64.tar.gz
```

Also, make sure this is in your `.bash_profile` file
```{bash}
PATH=$PATH:/users/shicks1/src/salmon-latest_linux_x86_64/bin
```

You can check to make sure salmon has been upgraded correctly using `salmon -h` inside terminal (or help with specific parts of using salmon using e.g. `salmon index -h` for help with the index step). 

OK, we are ready to use `salmon`. 

- The `-t` argument is the input transcripts file. 
- The `-i` argument is the index file to create. 
- The `-d` argument is the decoy sequence. 
- The `--keepDuplicates` argument forces all duplicate transcripts (for example, multiple unspliced transcript of the same gene that are identical for example) that appear in the input will be retained and quantified separately. If you keep the duplicates they will be assigned identical expression levels since salmon can’t tell them apart. When you aggregate on the gene level, this will not make a difference any more. Therefore, I do not keep the duplicates as we are interested in gene level aggregation. 
- The `--gencode` flag will handle the composite fasta headers in GENCODE transcript fasta files and split the transcript name at the first '|' character. 
- The `--threads` argument says how many threads to use when building the index. 

The salmon index is built using the `01_quantification/build-index-salmon.sh` file (used 4 cores). The index uses the `decoys.txt` and is built from the combined FASTA file (`gentrome_transcripts_mouse.fa.gz`).

#### Running `salmon alevin`

We will now use the index created by `build-index-salmon.sh`.
See the `01_quantification/run-alevin.sh` file.

#### Create `SingleCellExperiment` object

Here we import the `_quant` files produced by `salmon alevin` into R/Bioconductor using the `tximeta` package. This package creates a `SummarizedExperiment` object. Finally, we convert these objects to a `SingleCellExperiment` (`sce`) object. These `sce` objects (`sce_TH.rds` and `sce_TL.rds`) are saved as `.RDS` file in the `01_quantification/salmon_quants` folder. 

- Useful file: https://mikelove.github.io/alevin2bioc/articles/alevin2bioc.html


## Data analysis 

### Identify clusters

We identify clusters in the `02_analysis/identify_clusters.Rmd`.
